---
date: "2020-10-02"
title: "libvirt qemu VMs"
tags: ["linux", "vm"]
category: "Linux"
cover:
  imageFile: "libvirt/cover.png"
---

With a fresh desktop linux install, I wanted to avoid installing VirtualBox again and finally learn how to setup a KVM VM with tools such as `qemu` and `libvirt`.

`libvirt` is a management tool that can be used to talk to hypervisors such as `qemu`. This simplifies working with `qemu` - the actual tool which does the hardware emulation.

Just like the GUI based VM creation process, we're going to go through many of the same steps here.

1. Create a Disk
2. Create a Network Interface
3. Start the VM
4. Install the OS
5. Profit

So lets get started..

## Setup

0. Dependencies.

No matter which distro you're on, you'll want to install a few packages. On arch we're going to execute:

```
yay qemu libvirt virt-install
```

I believe the packages have the same name in the Debian / Ubuntu world, so just replace `yay` with `sudo apt install`.

1. Create Disk

First we have to create a disk image for the OS to install into. The following command will create a qcow2 image of 15gb. QCOW2 is the default storage format for virtual disks in the qemu world and stands for "QEMU Copy-on-write". This second version added support for encryption and multiple snapshots. In short, qcow2 images are a representation of a fixed size block device in a file.

We're going to use the `qemu-img` binary which ships with `qemu` to generate this 15GB image at `/var/lib/libvirt/images/`. Feel free to adjust the path, but this is the default storage location for `libvirt` images.

```
sudo qemu-img create -o preallocation=metadata -f qcow2 /var/lib/libvirt/images/test1.qcow2 15G
```

2. Create Network Interface

The easiest setup to provide a network connection to a VM is via whats known as a network bridge aka a shared physical device. Here we're going to use `virsh`, which ships with `libvirt`, to create said bridge.

First, we'll need to create a bridge definition in `/var/lib/libvirt/network`.

```
sudo vim /var/lib/libvirt/network/br10.xml
```

Then enter the following:

```
<network>
  <name>br10</name>
  <forward mode='nat'>
    <nat>
      <port start='1024' end='65535'/>
    </nat>
  </forward>
  <bridge name='br10' stp='on' delay='0'/>
  <ip address='192.168.30.1' netmask='255.255.255.0'>
    <dhcp>
      <range start='192.168.30.50' end='192.168.30.200'/>
    </dhcp>
  </ip>
</network>
```

Feel free to adjust the above ip ranges, bridge name, etc.

After you've saved the file, we'll go into `virsh` and define the network.

```
sudo virsh
net-define /var/lib/libvirt/network/br10.xml
net-start br10
quit
```

Now if you check your available network interfaces (`ip link show`), you should see `br10` listed among your physical interface, loopback, maybe wifi, etc.

3. Start Installation

Finally, we can begin the installation with the disk and network interface we just created!

With `virt-install`, you can actually automate the entire installation process if you wanted to so as to do a completely unattended install. However, we're going to do a bog standard install today with the following command:

```
sudo virt-install --virt-type kvm --name ubuntu2010 --ram 2048 \
   --disk /var/lib/libvirt/images/test1.qcow2,format=qcow2 \
   --network bridge=br10 \
   --graphics vnc,listen=0.0.0.0 \
   --os-type=linux --os-variant=ubuntu20.04 \
   --cdrom=/opt/images/ubuntu-20.10-beta-desktop-amd64.iso
```

You'll see here we're defining a few things, the type of vm (`kvm`), the name (`ubuntu2010`), the amount of ram in mb (`2048`), the disk image we created earlier as well as its format, the network bridge we just created, as well as a graphics settings (in this case, start vnc and listen on 0.0.0.0). Finally, we're telling it what type of OS we're install (`linux`) and where to find the boot image.

There are many flags for `virt-install`, so I won't go over all of them here, but you can view its man page either on your system if you have it installed, or online [here](https://manpages.debian.org/testing/virtinst/virt-install.1.en.html)

4. Using your new VM

Finally, once the install is complete and you've shut it down for the first time, you're probably wondering how do I start the VM again?! Easy!

```
virsh start [vm name]
```

Most things can be done through the `virsh` command. You can always check `virsh help` if you forget a command or are looking for something new.

Oh and one last thing that confused me at first in `libvirt` world - VMs are called 'domains' here.

Finally, if you really want a GUI to manage your VMs, you can always install `virtmanager`, which is a VirtualBox-like GUI on top of `libvirt`.
